---
sidebar_position: 2
sidebar_label: 'Competitive landscape'
---

# The (state layer) interoperability landscape

The transport layer is the uniquely defining layer of interoperability protocols. At a high level, there’s the IBC transport standard (that Polymer implements) and there’s incompatible alternative transport layers that competitors implement. 

Arguably these alternative transport layers cannot even be considered a complete transport standard as they do not enforce TAO logic, do not have a specification and are highly simplistic, unfit to handle scaling connnectivity. Since alt-transports are incompatible with the IBC network and lack standardization, we’ll review the interoperability landscape from the lens of the state layer below.

## Centralized bridges

These are also known as _proof of authority_ (PoA) bridges. These are a fixed group of private keys that have the authority to attest to bridged state from one chain to another. When there’s no open participation model, the bridge can only be considered to be centralized. 

:::danger Bridge hacks

The obvious downsides of this approach is that the private keys used in the signing process are prime targets for hacks. 

:::

Centralized bridges can migrate to a multi-signature bridge by allowing for open participation for signers.

## Multi-signature bridges

Multi-signature bridges can be a _proof of stake_ (PoS) validator network or a decentralized oracle network. The key takeaway is that there is some **dynamic group of signers that can change over time**. There is usually some economic value that’s staked and can be slashed upon misbehavior to guarantee the security of the bridge. 

:::caution Still prone to attacks

The downside of centralized bridges still applies here but the attack vector now also comes in the form of economic attacks to gain control of the bridge. 

:::

Additionally, a major issue with relying on a few observers of a chain to attest to state is that the local view of the observers is likely not consistent with the view of a chain with a large validator set such as Ethereum. This is true for both centralized and multi-signature bridges.

## Light client bridges

Light client bridges rely on the **verification of a consensus proof** generated by a chain. Each counterparty chain verifies the consensus proof of the other to establish a state layer connection. IBC was initially limited to using light clients to bridge state between chains, although [this is changing](../concepts/ibc/ibc-clients.md)

:::tip

Light client bridges are more secure than centralized and multi-signature bridges but are more expensive to verify. 

:::

Since clients are verifying the consensus of a chain but not the execution, this approach has an honest majority assumption security wise.

## Optimistic bridges

Optimistic bridging in its strongest form involves the destination chain being able to **verify fraud/fault proofs** produced by the source chain. This is execution verification instead of consensus verification. 

:::note Analogous to Optimistic rollups
Bridging from optimistic rollups to Ethereum follows this model. 
:::

There’s also a weaker form of optimistic bridging that involves a sharded economic security model that relies on a relayer staking a slashable bond on the source chain although this presents a significant security reduction.

:::tip Security that increases with fraud proof window

Optimistic bridges generally have good security that increases with the fraud proof window. The amount of capital and resources an attacker would need to spend to censor a fraud proof increases with the size of the fraud proof window. 

:::

An optimistic bridging model implies an **honest minority assumption or a 1-of-N assumption** security wise.

## ZK bridges

Zero knowledge (ZK) bridging in its strongest form involves the destination chain being able to **verify execution proofs** produced by the source chain.

This type of ZK bridging with validity proofs implies execution verification, instead of consensus verification.

:::note Analogous to ZK rollups
Bridging from zero knowledge rollups to Ethereum follows this model. 
:::

The most common form of zero knowledge bridging in interoperability is converting consensus proofs into zero knowledge consensus proofs. Using zk consensus proofs is as good as light client bridges with respect to security but weaker than optimistic bridges. 

This type of ZK bridging model implies an **honest majority assumption**, as is the case if the consensus proofs were regular and not ZKP based.

## Canonical bridges

Canonical bridges are run by the team building an L1 or L2 and sanctioned by the team to move liquidity in and out of their ecosystem. 

They theoretically can be any of the above in a fully decentralized setting. 
:::caution To date, often centralized
However, many canonical bridge implementations are highly centralized. They generally consist of some centralized set of private keys that are authorized to bridge state from one chain to the next. 
:::

In the long term, we may see canonical bridges start moving over to more secure forms of state layer bridging.

## What now?

From the last two sections it should be clear now: the state of interoperability today suffers from two major issues (or opportunities). The proliferation of executions environment has created fragmentation and solutions have emerged that are deprioritising security and trust-minimization. Read on to see Polymer's solution.

